Tel. Department 
No. 12 of 1867

To:
Lieut. Colonel Goldsmid
Director in Chief
Indo European Telegraph

From:
Lieut. O. St. John R.E.
Superintendent 3rd Division
Persian Telegraph
By Shiraz, April 19th1867


Sir, 
In reply to your letter No. 437 1867. I have the honor to state that my letter No 9 of 24th March was written in compliance with an order contained in a demi official letter from Major Smith, and running as follows:
“Regarding the other presents, write me by first courier an official memo. In the subject, which I will forward to Colonel Goldsmid who will submit it for sanction.”
From this I supposed that application to government was delayed until a detailed list of proposed recipients could be received from me, and this I accordingly submitted by next opportunity. Had I been in Shiraz when Major Smith’s letter reached me, I could have replied by the same courier, but I was at that time putting up the second wire in the hills near Bushire, and my answer was delayed for a month. I knew nothing of the purchase in London of £50 watches for the Governors of Shiraz and Kermanshah, and wrote the letter required by Major Smith under the impression that it would be the first on the subject.
I certainly made out with Major Smith in November, or December last, a rough memorandum of proposed recipients, but this he wrote to me afterwards was not enough to act upon. 
With regard to the changes necessary in the proposals contained in your letter to the Under Secretary of State for India, I have the honor respectfully to submit, that the £50 watch first intended for the Governor of Fars and afterwards the Lieut. Governor of Bushire be presented to His Excellency the Kavam-ul-Mulk, Deputy Governor of Shiraz. This nobleman is the representative of the richest and most influential family in Fars and has entire charge of the civil government of the city of Shiraz. After the disturbance which took place in December last, he was made responsible by H.R.H. the Governor for the safety and freedom from annoyance of the telegraph officials. This charge I am happy to say he has done all in his power to carry out; and I am convinced that the proof of good will for services rendered and expected, conveyed in the present of a gold watch from H.M.’s  Government, will have the effect of preventing or smoothing over the many difficulties, more or less serious, which are so constantly arising in a fanatical city like Shiraz. With regard to the Deputy Governor of Bushire I beg to withdraw my recommendation that any present be given to him. He shows no zeal in protecting the line of telegraph in his district from injury, in spite of frequent reprimands from the Prince Governor of Shiraz - and a short time since stated that a complaint laid by me on the evidence of one of my English inspectors of the destruction of 26 insulators was false. 
In my letter to Major Smith, I proposed that a gold watch, value £25 should be presented to H.E. the Mushir-ul-Mulk. This nobleman is the vizier of Fars, but we are not often brought into contact with him. Whenever an opportunity arose, however, he invariably did his best against us until I propitiated him by the present of an English watch as a mark of friendship on my own account. It is not, I consider, absolutely necessary to make him any further present. 
One half of the £100 applied for will be sufficient for the household of the Prince Governor of Fars, being, a present of the value of £20 each to the Farash Bashi and the Monshi Bashi, and £10 in money to the inferior servants. If the remaining £50 be not required for Kermanshah, it may be applied to the purchase of a gold watch each for the Imam-e-Juma and the Sheikh-al-Islam of Shiraz. These men, the heads of the priesthood, are entirely independent of the Governor, and their friendship and goodwill would be all important in the case of any émeute in the city, when the Europeans would probably be among the first objects of attack. I may add that the Imam-e-Juma saved the lives of the Persian signallers, when the telegraph office was attacked and gutted by the mob, in July 1865. I have, with some trouble succeeded in entering into personal acquaintance with both, and anticipate much good from this establishment of friendly relations, which would be of course increased by the presentation of gold watches.
If the £50 is required for the servants of the Governor of Kermanshah, I would most earnestly beg that government be moved to sanction an additional £50 for this purpose. 
It would appear inexpedient at the present moment to ask sanction for a sum to be expended in presents to be bestowed on Chiefs of wandering tribes and others as occasion may offer, but I would beg / leave to bring to your notice that twelve or more “Westley Richards,” Whitworths breach loading rifles with ammunition complete are now in store at Kurrachee, forming part of the £1000 worth of presents purchased by the late Lieut. Colonel Stewart for the Arab tribe in Mesopotamia. 
These would be much appreciated in Persia, and would obviate the necessity of any further outlay in presents at this time. Mr. Walton might be directed to send them with any other of the presents remaining unsold, to Bushire. 

I have the honor to be, 
Sir, 
your most obedient servant. 

O. St. John Lieut. R.E.


No 9 – Of 1867

From:

Lt. St. John R.E.
Dept 3rd-Divinion Persian Telegraph

To:

Major R. M. Smith R.E.
Director Persian Telegraph

Shiraz 24th March 1867

Sir, 
you are well aware of the desirability of the superintendents of divisions cultivating friendly relations with the magnates of the towns in which the offices under their charge are situated. In Shiraz I have always endeavours to do so, and I believe the fact of my personal acquaintance with the governor of Shiraz and others has on several occasions much facilitated the settlement of contretemps which might have had serious results. At the same time the addition to the number of our staff has for various reasons rendered such contretemps more frequent and increased the necessity of establishing such relations with them in authority as to render amicable settlement possible. 
If H.M. Indian Government would consent to the outlay of a sum not exceeding 4,000 Rupees in presents for the principal people of this city it would I believe not only facilitate the settlement of dispute but render them less frequent. H.R.H. the Hissam-es-Intanch has already received a suitable recognition of his kindness and good will, from H.M. government. 
The other persons to whom I would recommend the presentation of suitable gifts are the Mushire-ul-Mulk, the Kavam-ul-Mulk, the Imam-e-Juma, the Sheek-ul-Islam, the Prince Governors Ferash Bashi, and the Governor of Bushire. To each of them I would recommend the presentation of a gold watch in similar present to the value of 300 Rupees. Say 4,000 altogether. The firit is the higeer of this prosence.
The second is the Chief Nobleman of the town and has been made responsible by the Prince Governor for the safety of the telegraph staff. The next two are the heads of the priesthood enemies whom it is desirable to conciliate. The Hissam is Sultimts Ferash and the Mooyehi Bashi are the confidential servants through whom all business with him must be carried on. I should have asked also for a present for the Eilkhanee or chief of the wandering tribes, as he has for the last two years effectively protected the line of telegraph from injury by Elliants, but he unfortunately died a few weeks ago. His Son, a youth of 18 is nominated his successor, but will have no real authority, which will rest in the hands of the Chiefs of the several tribes. For these and some others I would ask the grant of the sum of 2,000 Rupees to be expended in Silver Watches, Guns and pistols to be presented as occasion recession may offer.  
The total sum asked for is thus 4,000 Rupees an outlay which would, I believe, be fully justified by the results. 
I have the honor to be, 
Sir, 
your obt servant
(Signed.) J. B. Lt. John Lt. R.E.
Dept 3rd-Divinion Persian Telegraph


No. 43 Tehran 8 April 1867
Reply
In the absence of llagn Smith I have the honor to forward for you information the copy of a letter which I despatched by the last English Mail to the undersery of State; at request that you will be good enough to furnish such explanation of the discrepancy apparent, on comparing the said letter with that lately addressed by you to the Director Persian Telegraph, as will enable me to make a further reference to the India office on the subject. 
Senwill observe that my proposals were bused entrily on information supplied to me since arrival in Persia, intended mnnemer to meet your on praker, supported by Mlayn Smith’s recommendation.

I have &&
The signature is not readable. 

