A. 33. of 1869
From Major R.M. Smith
Director Persian Telegraph
To Major UphampantE
Asst. Director it chief
Indo-European telegraph
Teheran
19th February 1869

Sir,
I have recently had many conversations with Mr. George Siemens, the representative of the Indo-European Telegraph Company on the arrangements proposed for the Persian portion of the line and have come to the conclusion in which I believe he agrees with me that the best plan for all concerned would be for the English Gov. to take over the whole line from Julfa to Bushire. 
The general terms on which this could be done equitably would be the repayment to the Company of their expenditure on the Julfa-Teheran section and the making of a conversion (for the 25 years of the Company's Concession) with the Persian Gov. for a third annual payment of say 15,000 Tomans, the total receipts 13 ½ Francs for message going to the English Gov. The company would then have 11 or 12 Francs per message after paying royalties, faire of lines, etc. for working the line from London to Julfa. 
The advantages of this arrangement for the English Gov. would be: (1) A more secure line through Persia, inasmuch as in the hands of the English Gov. It would be far less liable to be injured by the personal intrigues of the Persian Ministers and Governors than in the hands of a private Company. (2) There would be every prospect of making it pay its expenses and also a percentage of interest on the cost of the arrangement. 
To the Company, the chief advantage would be the diminution of the risk of their undertaking. In the event of the necessity of winding up the Company before the expiration of their Concessions, they would not receive a farthing of indemnification from the Persian Gov. for all their expenditure in the country. (2) The additional security furnished to the whole undertaking by the Persian line being in the hands of the English Gov. would of course be an advantage to the Company as well as to Gov. The proposals now render discussion between the Persian Gov. and the Company for the purchase of our receipts and the ceding by the English Gov. of half the receipts above 30,000 Tomans per annum are tantamount to a subsidy. If such subsidy is necessary to the existence of the Company after they are relieved of all their expenditure original and arrival in Persia, it might I think be much more conveniently granted by giving them one or two Francs (of the 13½) on every message passing over the Julfa-Bushire line, such grant being given in consideration of the efficiency of their London-Julfa line bringing a largely increased traffic to the Persian and submarine ones.
The cost, of superintendence and working of the whole line from Julfa to Bushire by an English Gov. administration would be proportionately much less than the Teheran Bushire Section, as the general direction traffic management etc. would be the same for a part as for the whole. On the other hand, should the whole line be taken over from Teheran to Bushire by the Company, I am convinced they won’t have the greatest difficulty in keeping up its efficiency, supported as they would be, only indirectly and remotely by the English Gov. Independently of this the tendency of such an arrangement would be to throw the control of the whole line in Persia as well as in Europe into the hands of Russia.
I am therefore decidedly of opinion that a settlement such as propose would be the best for the efficiency of the line, and the security of the Company as well for financial and political considerations on the part of the English Government.

I have the honor to be
Sir,
Your most obedient servant
Smith Major R.M.
Director Persian Telegraph