The Indo-European Telegraph Co.
(LIMITED.)
Telegraph Street, Moorgate Street.
London E. C. 8th July 1876

Sir,
I have submitted to my Board your letter of 27th ult with reference to the question of the ownership of the Persian terminal rates from the date of the commencement of this Company’s operations until the 31st of March 1873; after which date the Anglo-Persian treaty of 1872 came into farce.
The point of issue whether the Persian Government has ceded its rates on International messages to this Company or not has been under the repeated and most careful consideration of my Directors.
The Concession granted by the Persian Government to this Company through Mr. George Siemens under date the 24th May 1869, was communicated to my Board in a French document which was stated to be an actual copy of the concession which Mr. George Siemens negotiated for and obtained. 

Major J. U. Bateman- Champain R.E.
Director in Chief Indo European
Government Telegraph Department
55 Parliament street
S.W.


The Persian text, being a translation merely of the French original agreed to by Mr. George Siemens, it now appears, failed to embody correctly the terms conceded and the meaning of the word “International” upon which the claim of this Company is based.
The Directors are reminded by you that the signature of the King of Persia has not been affixed to the French text and that the Company would therefore have great difficulty in establishing their claim against the Persian Government, which apparently will not recognize any but the Persian translation, and judging from the result of the Company’s representations and negotiations this conclusion appears to be correct. 
From the facts above narrated there can be no doubt as to the agreement accepted by the Bards Agent and the Directors cannot acknowledge themselves liable for any errors which may have found their way into the Persian translation. 
The Board, under these circumstances, can only accept under ching protest the decision come to by your Department to refund to the Persian Government the sum of £657,16. 2 2/5, the amount of tunnial rates paid into the Royalty account for the year 1870 and the sums similarly claimed but not received by the Company up to the date of the new healy; viz: the 31st March 1873.

I am, Sir,
your obedient Servant
Andrews
Manager & Secretary

